let's talk to lassari about sorting so
we have many sorts out there that take
in log in worst-case time right
mergesort you find its worst case input
it takes no more than n log n time now
the question is could we do even better
than that find some sort whose Achilles
heel takes only in log log n time or
just in time perhaps is that possible so
to give us something concrete to hold on
to let's imagine we have something i'll
call the ultimate comparison sort in
comparison sort I just mean it makes a
sequence of calls to compare to to
decide how to order things let's say
that sucks the ultimate comparison based
sort is the algorithm that has the
asymptotically fastest possible
worst-case runtime okay so you give
in and put and no matter what it
will have just blazing fast wonderful
asymptotic runtime and let's say that
its runtime is our then which is its
worst-case runtime in theta notation in
other words our event is some function
and the worst-case runtime of tux is
Theta our event okay so what we can say
then this worst-case runtime of tux it's
some function r MN oh and i can tell you
that that function whatever it is it's
in log n why is that I'm gonna draw a
little picture here so this is tux it is
a worst-case runtime in theta notation
and I could say to that runtime is not
going to be any worse than in log n why
is that so the reason there is that we
already have an algorithm that takes
data and log n merge sort for example
let's suppose tucks its worst-case
runtime with N squared that is our oven
equals theta N squared that would be a
proof that that's not actually tux
because we said by definition tux must
be big fastest sorting algorithm
asymptotically and in that case is not
as good as merge sort okay so we know we
have a proof of concept that there
exists some algorithm which has n log n
runtime so this runs I'm are of em we
could say it's o of n log n okay now
again just to kind of remind you what is
our event our of n is the runtime of
tucks in the worst case so the runtime
of tuxes theta R of em and here we're
trying to speculate about
at function our Venn and I could say
that our of n is Big O of n log n so how
about the worst-case runtime of tux how
else can we found it well I can say that
the worst-case runtime of tux our oven
is omega one and I'll put it here on
this diagram and that basically just
says the problem doesn't get any easier
with them and the question is can we
make a stronger statement than Omega 1
ok so imagine here you're trying to
consider all possible sorting algorithms
out there is there a better bound on the
runtime of that of the tux ok I'm going
to say yes I think linear is a good
lower bound and the basic argument there
is that whatever the runtime of tux is
in the worst case it has do a be at
least linear time because we have to at
least look at every item here so this
algorithm whatever it is tuxes
worst-case runtime is going to be Omega
N and that's just another way of saying
it has to at least look at every item
you can't be so clever but you don't
have to look at every item because let's
say you know you try and come up with a
sorting algorithm it only looks at the
first half of the items or something
well I still in right o Satan looks at
the first square root of n items right
so if you give it a thousand items it
only hit looks like you look at 10,000
items that have to only look at the
first hundred or something that wouldn't
make any sense because there's all the
stuff you haven't looked at so I hope
it's clear that the runtime of tux has
to be at least linear time and so in
terms of all of our formal symbols here
I can say that the worst-case runtime of
tux which is stata our event that
function R of n itself is omega n and
Big O of n log N and if all these o's
and omegas are getting a little
confusing you can maybe just imagine
that we have greater than or equal to or
less than or equal to symbols and i hope
that will help demystify it so it turns
out that it is possible to do even
better than in and that runtime is going
to turn out to be n log n so we're going
to show that we can actually do better
than saying it's at least linear to say
it's at least n log N and what that
lower bound means what's so interesting
about this is it across the entire space
anything
you might imagine across all of
humanity's cleverness and ambition to
try and do better among all of those
ideas none of them is any better than
mergesort asymptotically in the worst
case okay that's what we're going to
show there's no need to go searching for
an even better sort at least in terms of
Assam pot and so what we'll do in the
next little video as well start
detailing this proof with a glorious
game known as puppy cat dog